<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III: Roxy Plays a Shrewd Trick</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Roxy Plays a Shrewd Trick</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>Whoever has lived long enough to find out what life is, knows how deep a debt of gratitude we owe to Adam, the first great benefactor of our race. He brought death into the world.</p>
					<cite>
						<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pudd‚Äônhead Wilson‚Äôs Calendar</i>
					</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Percy Driscoll slept well the night he saved his house-minions from going down the river, but no wink of sleep visited Roxy‚Äôs eyes. A profound terror had taken possession of her. Her child could grow up and be sold down the river! The thought crazed her with horror. If she dozed and lost herself for a moment, the next moment she was on her feet flying to her child‚Äôs cradle to see if it was still there. Then she would gather it to her heart and pour out her love upon it in a frenzy of kisses, moaning, crying, and saying, ‚ÄúDey shan‚Äôt, oh, dey <em>shan‚Äôt!</em>‚ÅÝ‚Äîyo‚Äô po‚Äô mammy will kill you fust!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Once, when she was tucking it back in its cradle again, the other child nestled in its sleep and attracted her attention. She went and stood over it a long time communing with herself:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat has my po‚Äô baby done, dat he couldn‚Äôt have yo‚Äô luck? He hain‚Äôt done noth‚Äôn‚Äô. God was good to you; why warn‚Äôt he good to him? Dey can‚Äôt sell <em>you</em> down de river. I hates yo‚Äô pappy; he hain‚Äôt got no heart‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor niggers he hain‚Äôt, anyways. I hates him, en I could kill him!‚Äù She paused awhile, thinking; then she burst into wild sobbings again, and turned away, saying, ‚ÄúOh, I got to kill my chile, dey ain‚Äôt no yuther way‚ÅÝ‚Äîkillin‚Äô <em>him</em> wouldn‚Äôt save de chile fum goin‚Äô down de river. Oh, I got to do it, yo‚Äô po‚Äô mammy‚Äôs got to kill you to save you, honey‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe gathered her baby to her bosom, now, and began to smother it with caresses‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúMammy‚Äôs got to kill you‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow <em>kin</em> I do it! But yo‚Äô mammy ain‚Äôt gwine to desert you‚ÅÝ‚Äîno, no; <em>dah</em>, don‚Äôt cry‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe gwine <em>wid</em> you, she gwine to kill herself too. Come along, honey, come along wid mammy; we gwine to jump in de river, den de troubles o‚Äô dis worl‚Äô is all over‚ÅÝ‚Äîdey don‚Äôt sell po‚Äô niggers down the river over <em>yonder</em>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She started toward the door, crooning to the child and hushing it; midway she stopped, suddenly. She had caught sight of her new Sunday gown‚ÅÝ‚Äîa cheap curtain-calico thing, a conflagration of gaudy colors and fantastic figures. She surveyed it wistfully, longingly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHain‚Äôt ever wore it yet,‚Äù she said, ‚Äúen it‚Äôs jist lovely.‚Äù Then she nodded her head in response to a pleasant idea, and added, ‚ÄúNo, I ain‚Äôt gwine to be fished out, wid everybody lookin‚Äô at me, in dis mis‚Äôable ole linsey-woolsey.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She put down the child and made the change. She looked in the glass and was astonished at her beauty. She resolved to make her death-toilet perfect. She took off her handkerchief-turban and dressed her glossy wealth of hair ‚Äúlike white folks‚Äù; she added some odds and ends of rather lurid ribbon and a spray of atrocious artificial flowers; finally she threw over her shoulders a fluffy thing called a ‚Äúcloud‚Äù in that day, which was of a blazing red complexion. Then she was ready for the tomb.</p>
			<p>She gathered up her baby once more; but when her eye fell upon its miserably short little gray tow-linen shirt and noted the contrast between its pauper shabbiness and her own volcanic irruption of infernal splendors, her mother-heart was touched, and she was ashamed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, dolling, mammy ain‚Äôt gwine to treat you so. De angels is gwine to ‚Äômire you jist as much as dey does yo‚Äô mammy. Ain‚Äôt gwine to have ‚Äôem putt‚Äôn‚Äô dey han‚Äôs up ‚Äôfo‚Äô dey eyes en sayin‚Äô to David en Goliah en dem yuther prophets, ‚ÄòDat chile is dress‚Äô too indelicate fo‚Äô dis place.‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</p>
			<p>By this time she had stripped off the shirt. Now she clothed the naked little creature in one of Thomas √Ý Becket‚Äôs snowy long baby-gowns, with its bright blue bows and dainty flummery of ruffles.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDah‚ÅÝ‚Äînow you‚Äôs fixed.‚Äù She propped the child in a chair and stood off to inspect it. Straightway her eyes began to widen with astonishment and admiration, and she clapped her hands and cried out, ‚ÄúWhy, it do beat all!‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI <em>never</em> knowed you was so lovely. Marse Tommy ain‚Äôt a bit puttier‚ÅÝ‚Äînot a single bit.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She stepped over and glanced at the other infant; she flung a glance back at her own; then one more at the heir of the house. Now a strange light dawned in her eyes, and in a moment she was lost in thought. She seemed in a trance; when she came out of it she muttered, ‚ÄúWhen I ‚Äôuz a-washin‚Äô ‚Äôem in de tub, yistiddy, his own pappy asked me which of ‚Äôem was his‚Äôn.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She began to move about like one in a dream. She undressed Thomas √Ý Becket, stripping him of everything, and put the tow-linen shirt on him. She put his coral necklace on her own child‚Äôs neck. Then she placed the children side by side, and after earnest inspection she muttered‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow who would b‚Äôlieve clo‚Äôes could do de like o‚Äô dat? Dog my cats if it ain‚Äôt all <em>I</em> kin do to tell t‚Äôother fum which, let alone his pappy.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She put her cub in Tommy‚Äôs elegant cradle and said‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôs young Marse <em>Tom</em> fum dis out, en I got to practise and git used to ‚Äômemberin‚Äô to call you dat, honey, or I‚Äôs gwine to make a mistake some time en git us bofe into trouble. Dah‚ÅÝ‚Äînow you lay still en don‚Äôt fret no mo‚Äô, Marse Tom‚ÅÝ‚Äîoh, thank de good Lord in heaven, you‚Äôs saved, you‚Äôs saved!‚ÅÝ‚Äîdey ain‚Äôt no man kin ever sell mammy‚Äôs po‚Äô little honey down de river now!‚Äù</p>
			<p>She put the heir of the house in her own child‚Äôs unpainted pine cradle, and said, contemplating its slumbering form uneasily‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôs sorry for you, honey; I‚Äôs sorry, God knows I is‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut what <em>kin</em> I do, what <em>could</em> I do? Yo‚Äô pappy would sell him to somebody, some time, en den he‚Äôd go down de river, sho‚Äô, en I couldn‚Äôt, couldn‚Äôt, <em>couldn‚Äôt</em> stan‚Äô it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She flung herself on her bed and began to think and toss, toss and think. By and by she sat suddenly upright, for a comforting thought had flown through her worried mind‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôTain‚Äôt no sin‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>white</em> folks has done it! It ain‚Äôt no sin, glory to goodness it ain‚Äôt no sin! <em>Dey‚Äôs</em> done it‚ÅÝ‚Äîyes, en dey was de biggest quality in de whole bilin‚Äô, too‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>kings!</em>‚Äù</p>
			<p>She began to muse; she was trying to gather out of her memory the dim particulars of some tale she had heard some time or other. At last she said‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow I‚Äôs got it; now I ‚Äômember. It was dat ole nigger preacher dat tole it, de time he come over here fum Illinois en preached in de nigger church. He said dey ain‚Äôt nobody kin save his own self‚ÅÝ‚Äîcan‚Äôt do it by faith, can‚Äôt do it by works, can‚Äôt do it no way at all. Free grace is de <em>on‚Äôy</em> way, en dat don‚Äôt come fum nobody but jis‚Äô de Lord; en <em>he</em> kin give it to anybody he please, saint or sinner‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>he</em> don‚Äôt kyer. He do jis‚Äô as he‚Äôs a mineter. He s‚Äôlect out anybody dat suit him, en put another one in his place, and make de fust one happy forever en leave t‚Äôother one to burn wid Satan. De preacher said it was jist like dey done in Englan‚Äô one time, long time ago. De queen she lef‚Äô her baby layin‚Äô aroun‚Äô one day, en went out callin‚Äô; en one o‚Äô de niggers roun‚Äô-‚Äôbout de place dat was ‚Äômos‚Äô white, she come in en see de chile layin‚Äô aroun‚Äô, en tuck en put her own chile‚Äôs clo‚Äôes on de queen‚Äôs chile, en put de queen‚Äôs chile‚Äôs clo‚Äôes on her own chile, en den lef‚Äô her own chile layin‚Äô aroun‚Äô en tuck en toted de queen‚Äôs chile home to de nigger-quarter, en nobody ever foun‚Äô it out, en her chile was de king bimeby, en sole de queen‚Äôs chile down de river one time when dey had to settle up de estate. Dah, now‚ÅÝ‚Äîde preacher said it his own self, en it ain‚Äôt no sin, ‚Äôca‚Äôse white folks done it. <em>Dey</em> done it‚ÅÝ‚Äîyes, <em>dey</em> done it; en not on‚Äôy jis‚Äô common white folks nuther, but de biggest quality dey is in de whole bilin‚Äô. Oh, I‚Äôs <em>so</em> glad I ‚Äômember ‚Äôbout dat!‚Äù</p>
			<p>She got up lighthearted and happy, and went to the cradles and spent what was left of the night ‚Äúpractising.‚Äù She would give her own child a light pat and say humbly, ‚ÄúLay still, Marse Tom,‚Äù then give the real Tom a pat and say with severity, ‚ÄúLay <em>still</em>, Chambers!‚ÅÝ‚Äîdoes you want me to take somep‚Äôn‚Äô <em>to</em> you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>As she progressed with her practice, she was surprised to see how steadily and surely the awe which had kept her tongue reverent and her manner humble toward her young master was transferring itself to her speech and manner toward the usurper, and how similarly handy she was becoming in transferring her motherly curtness of speech and peremptoriness of manner to the unlucky heir of the ancient house of Driscoll.</p>
			<p>She took occasional rests from practising, and absorbed herself in calculating her chances.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDey‚Äôll sell dese niggers today fo‚Äô stealin‚Äô de money, den dey‚Äôll buy some mo‚Äô dat don‚Äôt know de chillen‚ÅÝ‚Äîso <em>dat‚Äôs</em> all right. When I takes de chillen out to git de air, de minute I‚Äôs roun‚Äô de corner I‚Äôs gwine to gaum dey mouths all roun‚Äô wid jam, den dey can‚Äôt <em>nobody</em> notice dey‚Äôs changed. Yes, I gwineter do dat till I‚Äôs safe, if it‚Äôs a year.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDey ain‚Äôt but one man dat I‚Äôs afeard of, en dat‚Äôs dat Pudd‚Äônhead Wilson. Dey calls him a pudd‚Äônhead, en says he‚Äôs a fool. My lan‚Äô, dat man ain‚Äôt no mo‚Äô fool den I is! He‚Äôs de smartes‚Äô man in dis town, less‚Äôn it‚Äôs Jedge Driscoll or maybe Pem Howard. Blame dat man, he worries me wid dem ornery glasses o‚Äô hisn; <em>I</em> b‚Äôlieve he‚Äôs a witch. But nemmine, I‚Äôs gwine to happen aroun‚Äô dah one o‚Äô dese days en let on dat I reckon he wants to print de chillen‚Äôs fingers ag‚Äôin; en if <em>he</em> don‚Äôt notice dey‚Äôs changed, I bound dey ain‚Äôt nobody gwine to notice it, en den I‚Äôs safe, sho‚Äô. But I reckon I‚Äôll tote along a hoss-shoe to keep off de witch-work.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The new Negroes gave Roxy no trouble, of course. The master gave her none, for one of his speculations was in jeopardy, and his mind was so occupied that he hardly saw the children when he looked at them, and all Roxy had to do was to get them both into a gale of laughter when he came about; then their faces were mainly cavities exposing gums, and he was gone again before the spasm passed and the little creatures resumed a human aspect.</p>
			<p>Within a few days the fate of the speculation became so dubious that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝPercy went away with his brother the Judge, to see what could be done with it. It was a land speculation as usual, and it had gotten complicated with a lawsuit. The men were gone seven weeks. Before they got back Roxy had paid her visit to Wilson, and was satisfied. Wilson took the fingerprints, labeled them with the names and with the date‚ÅÝ‚ÄîOctober the first‚ÅÝ‚Äîput them carefully away and continued his chat with Roxy, who seemed very anxious that he should admire the great advance in flesh and beauty which the babies had made since he took their fingerprints a month before. He complimented their improvement to her contentment; and as they were without any disguise of jam or other stain, she trembled all the while and was miserably frightened lest at any moment he‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>But he didn‚Äôt. He discovered nothing; and she went home jubilant, and dropped all concern about the matter permanently out of her mind.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
